Okay, you were saying that the students in the
square were receiving support from the other
people in the city of Beijing. A
sense of camaraderie, you're suggesting. And you
were just telling me that the older generation had
a feeling of admiration, maybe, and wishing they
had been willing to speak up. That's what was
beginning to dawn on them. And the students acted
as the catalyst. The students were very
politically wise in the sense that at the
beginning, their comments were focused more at
the government's treatment of the students in the
university and wanting better conditions at the
university. Like the poor cafeterias you were
talking about. Poor cafeterias and living
conditions and that. But they broadened their
criticisms. to include corruption that was going
on in the government. And we have to remember here
that the students were not, and the people in
Beijing, were not advocating to overthrow the
government. This was a very peaceful
demonstration. The students knew that they had to
keep things peaceful because if there was any even
hint of civil unrest, if they set any cars on fire or
were throwing bricks through any windows, as
we've seen happen in some other countries, that
that would give the government the excuse they
needed to use whatever level of force that they
wanted to put down the demonstration. So the
students did everything you would possibly to
completely control what was going on so that
nothing got out of hand, so that no fights broke
out, so that there wasn't any real trouble. The
students broadened their comments to include
things that people from broader sectors of
society could relate to. The corruption, as I
mentioned, that there was going on in the
government where people at high levels of
government who were supposed to be looking out for
the good of the people were not. They were using
their position to their own advantage and to their
family's advantage monetarily. And the people
were also beginning to realize, I think, that they
could actually make some decisions for
themselves. Throughout Chinese history,
through Confucianism, through their culture,
that they had been trained to give their
allegiance to the leader, the emperor and the
people under him, all the way down to the family
unit. The father was the absolute head of the
family. You didn't question, you didn't disagree
with what the person of authority above you told
you. You just were totally submissive to that. You
did whatever they said. And I think what has
happened over the thousands of years that they
have done is the people have subconsciously let
themselves become dependent upon their leaders
and they felt that they needed the leaders to make
the decisions for them and to provide a place for
them to live, to provide food, to provide clothing
and that for them. And the older generation in
particular, I think, during the 80s and the
limited amount of economic freedom that they had,
were beginning to realized that they did not need
to rely on leaders to make all the decisions for
them. They were beginning to get a feeling of
self-confidence, that they could actually make
some decisions for themselves. And they wanted
the government, again, there's no opposition
party. They were not asking to overthrow the
government. They were asking the government to be
more responsive to their needs and to allow them a
little bit more control over their lives. For
example, the government would decide when a
person could get married, where they could have
children, where they would live, where they would
work. Things that we in this country take for
granted as basic freedom of choice. People do not
have that. When you were there in 85, 86 and had a
chance to enter In your work with some of the
students, you got a very clear feeling of this. You
work where the government gives you a job after
graduation and so forth. Carrying over that sense
of understanding of the students, a little while
ago you mentioned that you felt somehow a sense of
the group as a whole wanting to keep things
peaceful, not wanting to get things out of hand.
Could you be specific at what gave you that feeling
as you were watching from the sidelines or walking
around? Well, in these groups, during the day,
there were smaller crowds within Tiananmen
Square in the evening, partly because people
worked during the day, and I think partly because,
again, the students and the Chinese people felt
that if the government was going to do something,
they were going to do it at night. And so in the early
evening, a lot of people would start coming to
Tiananmen Square. Now, there's not a whole lot of
entertainment things to do in Beijing anyway. And
Tiananmen Square, in the summertime, is a place
where people can go. It's out in the open, so there
is some breeze. So it's cooler than it is in the high
rise apartments that they have. But because the
demonstrations weren't going on, of course,
there's a lot of curiosity. And people would come
there in the evenings. And one evening, on a Friday
evening, I had gone with some friends to eat at a
restaurant near Tiananmen Square. And we tried
coming down Chinatown Avenue in a car to see what
was going on at Tiananmen Square. And three blocks
before we even got to Tiananmen Square, Chinatown
Avenue was completely filled with people. So we
had to go. Not vehicles. You're talking about
people. I'm talking about people. so we had to go
around the Forbidden City behind that to get back
towards our hotel. And yet, even though you had
this large group of people, they were not unruly.
Students were continually going around. You
would see small groups, and they would be telling
people what was happening, what was going on. As a
matter of fact, throughout Beijing, you would see
students with small groups of people around them,
and the students were putting posters up on
telephone poles and that for people to read so they
could know what had been going on, what had been
transpiring, or talking with these groups. And if
you compare it to going to a college football game
here in the United States, you get a certain amount
of rowdiness and shoving and pushing, but there
was none of that going on. Even though you had for
larger numbers of people, it was still very
peaceful. And the Saturday evening, I... Excuse
me, that would be Saturday evening, the 3rd of
June? Okay. This was the evening the massacre
started. I had been out to the Great Wall that day.
This was the last day of our conference, and they
had arranged for buses to take us out there. And we
had gotten back to Beijing about 5 o'clock in the
afternoon and I had heard that the students had
been tear gassed during the day. So I thought I
would make my way to Tiananmen Square to see if the
situation had changed from when I had been there
the day before. Excuse me, you went out by
yourself. So I went out by myself. I did not want to
go directly to Tiananmen Square because with that
large amount of people and we knew that there were
troops soldiers in the train station which is
about three blocks from channel square i did not
want to get caught in the middle so it was i took this
is where having lived in beijing for a year was was
helpful to me in that i knew my way around the city
and i felt that i would be able to sense any real
danger or spot any real danger soon enough that I
could find a way out of the situation. So I took a cab
to the Friendship Store, which is about a mile and a
half east of Tiananmen Square on the main avenue,
Chandler Avenue. And when I got there, there were
people going both directions towards the square
and coming from the square. No one seemed to be
unduly concerned or worried. In the early
evenings, because a lot of people would
congregate in Tiananmen Square, the bus and
automobile traffic would be stopped. And it was
already, there were hardly any cars or buses going
down. So I decided what I'd do is I would walk
towards Tiananmen Square And that way, if
anything started happening, I would be able to see
it and get out of the way. About halfway down, I saw a
group of about 25 soldiers who were, I think, just
out for some daily exercise. They were about 100
yards ahead of me. And I watched them as they went
down the street. And they crossed. I was on the
north side of Cheltenham Avenue, which is on
eight-lane roads. This is a major street. And they
crossed that and went into one of the, down one of
the side avenues there. And I did not see them. The
people were walking by, didn't pay much attention
to them. These were wearing soldiers carrying
guns. Oh, yeah, they were in uniforms. These did
not have guns. They were just out marching around.
Okay. I said, I think they were just out for some
daily exercise, and so they went back towards the
direction of the train station. So it took me about
an hour and a half to walk down to Tiananmen Square.
I got there about 7 o'clock in the evening. And
things looked peaceful. I could not really tell
any difference in terms of the tents and the gas
democracy flags and that that were flying. And I
walked around the square and then decided to just
observe what was going on. I got myself on the east
side of Tiananmen Square because I felt that that
had the most options for me in terms of avenues of
escape to get out of there if anything started
happening. And just sat there and watched the
people. as more and more people started coming
into the square. Most of the people, I said, in
China, they get around on bicycles. And I was
struck by the fact that here were people, there
were young couples who were out on a date,
teenagers, families, a father, a mother, a small
child. They have these three-wheeled bicycles
that have kind of a big seat in the back. And the
father would be pedaling. The wife and the child
would be in the back. And even some older couples
were riding their bicycles around Tiananmen
Square to see what was going on. Some of it was
probably curiosity. And part of it was to support
the students in what was going on. It reminded me of
a Saturday night of people cruising around the
Dairy Queen.
All of these people and all this activity was very,
very peaceful. And I was struck by the fact that
there were four ambulances that were parked right
over near me. And they had a big sign on the side of
them that they had been provided by the government
of Italy. And I thought across my head, why had the
United States done something like this? Why had we
provided some kind of care like this. And as a
matter of fact, one of the students, while I was
sitting there, apparently had passed out. And
several of his friends had picked him up and put him
on one of these Trishaw bicycles and brought him
over to the ambulance, and the ambulance took him
off towards the hospital. But the students were
gathered mainly around the to the Heroes of the
People, which is in the back part of the square in
front of Miles Mausoleum. And they were using
their own loudspeaker system that they had to talk
to the large group. There are also the light poles
around Tiananmen Square are speakers. And the
government was using that to get its own message
across. I wish now that I had taken the tape
recorder along and taped some of that so I could
have translated, but I didn't do that. After
watching all this for about an hour, everything
was so peaceful in a way it was boring. There
wasn't, you know, I watched it and there wasn't
anything dramatic happening. Can I ask, you're
obviously different in size than most Orientals.
You're over six foot. different in appearance,
did that make you stand out, or did they respond to
you? Well, people, they recognize that you're
foreign. You can't hide that. Height is not so much
a factor with the Chinese as it is with the
Japanese. The Japanese are much more uniform with
their height, about 5'2", 5'3". But the Chinese,
there are a lot of Chinese that are 6 feet and
taller, so My height was not particularly
standing out. But, of course, the color of your
skin and your eyes and that, you're obviously not
Chinese. So they knew you were a foreigner. Oh,
yes. But the people of Beijing, you see, they've
been exposed to foreigners for eight or ten years,
whereas some of the places that we went while we
were in China, there was one village where...
We may have been some of the first foreigners that
they saw. And Taylor, our youngest, said two and a
half with very blonde hair. He really attracted
attention. That may have been the first foreign
child that these people had ever seen. The people
of Beijing, you don't stick out as much. I think
what they were looking for in terms of foreigners,
though, were particularly people who were the
foreign press. And they realized that They needed
to let the world know what was going on, because the
Chinese government wasn't going to tell the
people the truth. So they felt that they were very
receptive to foreign press uh being there you
mentioned though that you had a camera um that
might have given you the aura of possibly being
media if they didn't i took some pictures of that
but but uh no one you know came up and tried to
initiate any conversation with me at that point so
you kind of sat for an hour an hour and a half
watching what was going on what happened then and
my uh daughter and older son were going to leave
from the Houston airport the next morning. It
would be Sunday morning, my time in Beijing,
Saturday here in the States. And it would be Sunday
evening in Beijing time, Sunday morning back here
in the States. So I decided I'd go ahead back to my
hotel and call back home one last time. because
that would be Saturday morning here, and tell them
everything is OK. Come on over, and I'll get you at
the airport. So they have some little trishaw
bicycles that people also use to earn some extra
money as kind of taxicabs. So I was pretty tired
from walking around the Great Wall all day, and
then walking all the way down to Calvin Square. So I
hired one of those guys. And as we were leaving
Tiananmen Square, we turned east on Charlotte
Avenue. I wanted to go back to the Friendship Store
where I could catch a cab. I noticed that a group of
students, just after we pulled into Charlotte
Avenue, they picked up a flag, which had Chinese
characters on it. I assumed it was representative
of their university or wherever they were from.
about a dozen of them started walking down
Tiananmen Square behind us. So I took a couple
pictures of that, and then some other groups were
following them, walking down Tiananmen Square,
and I thought, hey, this is kind of neat. And we'd
gone about four blocks, and we came to the
intersection where we knew to the south was the
train station. We knew there were troops. Well, as
we were coming up, there was a large mass of people
that almost completely blocked Chonelet Avenue.
And they have these little round boxes that sit out
in the intersections. And policemen, in normal
traffic, they stand up on those intersections.
They direct traffic. Well, there wasn't any
traffic. And the police had just kind of turned
over the crowd control to the students. And so
there were no policemen around. But there was a
young man up on this platform. And he was trying to
talk to the crowd. And I knew that the students had
credentials and IDs to identify themselves as
students so that people would know that they were
really students and not somebody from the
government trying to
spread other types of information. And
apparently some of the people in the crowd had
asked him to identify himself, and he was holding
up this ID and showing it to them. And I was
concerned that maybe they were there because the
troops were coming out of the railway station. But
the guy was able to get around to the north side of
the street. There was still part of one lane that
was open there. And I was able to see down the street
towards the train station. And there weren't any
troops who were coming out from that direction.
And we continued down on Chonklin Avenue. We were
about 3 quarters of a mile to a mile away from
Tiananmen Square. And Chonklin Avenue meets this
other, what they call the Second Ring Road. It's
like one of the loops around Houston. So this is a
major intersection. And Charlotte Avenue goes up
a slight incline there and a bridge over this
second ring road. And as we approached that, there
were more and more people coming there, and the
street was completely blocked. And the taxi guy
didn't speak much English, but made it clear
there's no way he could get through that. And I was
within a couple of blocks of the Friendship So I
figured, you know, that was okay. He wanted to
increase the price, but we bargained, and I was
satisfied, and he was satisfied. And I got off the
tri-shop, but this time the students with the
flags. It just about caught on with me. And I walked
up to the front edge of this crowd and was able to
look over the heads of most people, and I realized
that about 30 yards from me was an Army truck. and
that the people had stopped this army truck, and
the people were starting to climb into this army
truck. As a matter of fact, there was a man who
looked like he may have been one of the news people
that had a video camera that was up in the back of
this truck taking some pictures. And my immediate
thought was, this is not the place that I want to be,
that something could happen. So immediately,
the... North was the direction where the fewest
people would have figured, well, I'll just go down
onto this ring road, and I'll go out that way, the
new way around. And as I started to come down, I was
able to see the whole Cloverleaf, realized it
wasn't just one army truck. They had stopped the
whole convoy of trucks that were from the top of the
bridge all the way around the Cloverleaf down
underneath. So there were probably 35 or 40 trucks
full of troops. I also realized that everything
was peaceful. There was no fighting. There was no
arguing going on. And the students with the flags
had gotten there by this time. And they got up on the
lead truck. And they were talking to the crowd and
keeping everybody very peaceful. So I had my
camera. And I said, well, go ahead and take a
chance. I'm taking a couple of pictures, even
though I knew you weren't supposed to take
pictures of the military. you know, this was a
chance of a lifetime. So I took several pictures of
the trucks that were stopped on top of this bridge.
I deliberately had left my flash at home because I
figured if it did get dark and I left my flash back at
the hotel because I did not want to be tempted to
take pictures in the dark because that way you're
spotted immediately. And I figured there was
enough commotion of the people who were watching
this guy with the video camera that nobody would
pay attention to me taking some pictures. So I took
several pictures, but then decided that I better
work my way over to the other side of this overpass.
Number one, that would get me closer to the
friendship store where I figured that I could get a
taxi. And that way, I figured I wouldn't be trapped
between these troops and the people in Tiananmen
Square. And as I, they have a little footbridge
there that people can go across, and I stopped
there for a little while, and this Chinese man in
his early 20s started talking to me. He just knew a
few words of English, and my Chinese was not good
enough to get across the ideas to begin
communicating with him. And there was this
younger girl, probably 15, 16, high school
student. And her mother was standing nearby. And
her mother encouraged
the girl to act as a translator, because she had
taken some English in high school. And so she would
interpret the guy's question to me, and then my
answer to him. And they asked me where I was from and
where I was staying. I was somewhat concerned
about giving too much detail because you don't
know who these people are. And we knew that the
government had some of their secret police in some
of these crowds trying to identify people with
that. So I was a little bit leery of giving them too
much information about my name and where I was
staying and that, just to talk to generalities.
After four or five minutes of that, then I went
ahead and went across and go to the outside of the
crowd on the east side and
sat down and
watched what was going on. By this time, I'd been
there for about, oh, maybe 15, 20 minutes. And it
was very much like a block party in that by this
time, vendors who were selling soda pop, ice
cream, They also cooked these little sticks, and
they put pieces of pork on it. They have a little
hibachi-like thing that they carry on with them,
and they were selling those. If I didn't know the
seriousness of the situation with these troops
sitting there, I would have thought this was a
party going on. This was all done in sight of that
convoy. Yeah, I was sitting maybe 20 yards from the
convoy. As a matter of fact, a couple of times, I
walked up to the trucks. I walked up close enough I
could shake hands with the soldiers who were in the
trucks. And I was taking a few pictures. But I
didn't want to call too much attention to myself,
so I didn't try to communicate with these
soldiers. But the people that were there, they
were very calm. There was no arguing between the
soldiers and the people. There was no arguing
among the people. There was no pushing and
shoving. parents were taking their children,
three years old, five years old, and they were
setting them up on the hoods of these trucks that
the troops were in. I did not see any weapons in
these troops' hands. They may have had them down on
the bottom of the floorboards of the truck. I may
have been fortunate enough that I ran into a unit
from the division that's stationed there in
Beijing who knew what was going on, knew that there
was not any civil disobedience going on in
Tiananmen Square, were sympathetic towards the
students, and did not want to go in there and shoot
the students. The Western media, from what I
understand, came to determine that there were two
armies, the 27th Army, which was not liked in
Beijing and was from outside, and there was the
38th Army, which was Beijing-based. you're
saying you're not sure which this was, but had a
feeling it was friendly. With the Chinese, part of
their, supposedly everybody is of equal status,
even the military, they don't have insignia
identifying what unit they're with or what their
rank is. They do not. They do not. Now, because we
were there, We had picked up on a few of the
subtleties. For example, the officers on their
green shirts, they have pockets. Enlisted men do
not. But unless you're aware of some things like
that, you can't tell even who the officers are
versus the enlisted men, much less what unit these
people are attached to. The...
The main reason why I think that these were part of
the friendly troops was because they were not
acting in any violent way. They were not trying to
force their way through the crowd. I remember
sitting, they have a little railing that goes
around on the edge of the road there. I was sitting
on one of these and there was one little Chinese
Boeing, must have been about two and a half, three
years old, And he could tell that I was different by
the way I looked. And he was very curious. And his
mother tried to encourage him to come closer. And I
would smile at him and wave to him. And he would take
a step or two closer to me. And then he would go back
to his mother and grab his mother's leg.
But this is what, I guess, amazed me, is to how these
people could be so peaceful. in such a potentially
explosive situation. Okay, you know what
happened later on. I mean, you're, this is almost
nine months later, so you know there was a violent
massacre is the term that's been used.
What happened now from this point when you were
watching these events and in her talking with the,
waving and so forth with these people. What
happened from this point till you knew something
traumatic had happened on the school? Well, I
stayed with this group of people for about an hour,
from about 8.30 to 9.30. And one of the
feelings that I had while I was there was, you know,
gee, I wish that Kristen and Lance were already
there, and I wish that Gay and Taylor could come